4.1 Pat Syntax, Types and Mailbox Types
Pat is a core first-order programming language with mailbox types. A more detailed description
is available in [15] that describes the declarative and algorithmic type systems, shows that the
algorithmic type system is sound and complete with respect to the declarative type system, and
provides a concurrent operational semantics.


Typing Actor Communication in Languages with Implicit Monolithic Mailboxes 11
âˆ’â†’
A program (S,
ğ·,ğ‘€)consists of a signature S which maps message tags to payload types; a set
of definitions ğ·; and an initial term ğ‘€. Each definition def ğ‘“(âˆ’âˆ’â†’
ğ‘¥:ğ‘‡):ğ‘ˆ{ğ‘€}is a function with name
âˆ’âˆ’â†’
ğ‘“, annotated arguments
ğ‘¥:ğ‘‡, return type ğ‘ˆ, and body ğ‘€.
Figure 7 gives the Pat data and mailbox types and syntax. This is the target of the translation
from an Erlang subset.
Syntax. Pat distinguishes syntactically between values and computations, as in fine-grain call-
by-value [30]. Values ğ‘£ include variables ğ‘¥ and literals ğ‘™; and the literals include a unit value ()of
type 1.
The functional fragment of the language is largely standard. Every value is a term. The only
evaluation context is let ğ‘¥=ğ‘’ in ğ‘‘. Function application f (ğ‘£1,...,ğ‘£ğ‘›)applies function ğ‘“ to arguments
ğ‘£1,...,ğ‘£ğ‘›.
In the concurrent fragment of the language, spawn ğ‘’ spawns term ğ‘’ as a separate actor/process,
and new [i]creates a fresh mailbox that conforms to interface i. Recall from the introduction that an
interface specifies the set of message types that a mailbox expects. So the interface for the Id Server
mailbox is PWT: Please supply an example. Term ğ‘¥ ! ğ‘šsends message ğ‘što ğ‘¥. The guard ğ‘¥: ğ´{ğ‘”}
expression asserts that mailbox ğ‘¥ contains pattern ğ´, and invokes a guard sequence ğ‘”. The fail
guard is triggered when an unexpected message has arrived; free(ğ‘¥)is triggered when a mailbox
is empty and there are no more references to it in the system. PWT: Duncan: please add a sentence
explaining guard sequences A guard sequence ...
Type System. The data types in Pat are unsurprising, so here we focus on describing the mailbox
types. A mailbox type consists of a capability, either output !or input ?, and a pattern. A system can
contain multiple references to a mailbox as an output capability, but only one as an input capability.
A pattern is a commutative regular expression, i.e., a regular expression where composition is
unordered. The 1 pattern is the unit of pattern composition âŠ™, denoting the empty mailbox. The
0 pattern denotes the unreliable mailbox, which has received an unexpected message. It is not
possible to send to, or receive from, an unreliable mailbox, but we show that reduction does not
cause a mailbox to become unreliable.
The pattern m denotes a mailbox containing a single message m. Pattern choice ğ´âŠ•ğµdenotes
that the mailbox contains either messages conforming to pattern ğ´or ğµ. Pattern composition ğ´âŠ™ğµ
denotes that the mailbox contains messages pertaining to ğ´and ğµ (in either order). Finally, ğ´âˆ—
denotes replication of ğ´, so mâˆ—denotes a mailbox that may contain zero or more instances of
message m. Mailbox patterns obey the usual laws of commutative regular expressions, e.g. 1 is the
unit for âŠ™, while 0 is the unit for âŠ•and is cancelling for âŠ™.
It follows that different syntactic representations of patterns may have the same meaning, e.g.
patterns 1 âŠ•0 âŠ•(m âŠ™n)and 1 âŠ•(n âŠ™m). Pat follows [12] and uses a set-of-multisets semantics for
mailbox patterns. The intuition is that each multiset defines a configuration of messages that could
be present in the mailbox. For example a semantic representation of both of the patterns above is
{âŸ¨âŸ©,âŸ¨m,nâŸ©}.
PWT: Do we need to say more about Pat types?